# i18n

Why does i18n means ?

Internationalization (i18n) is the process of designing and developing software to be adapted for users of different cultures and languages.

## Create locales files

Firstly you will need translation files, this files should be javascript files. Every translation file must export a javascript object as default.

```js
// en-US.js
export default {
    name: "Name",
    error: "An error has occured ! Retry later...",
    currency: (amount) => `${amount}$ (USD)`,
};
```

## Reference locales files

In a second time you will need to reference your files with the `useI18n` method, all the files will be lazy load only when necessary.

By doing this, the `useI18n` method will return a [signal](./signal.md) which contains the default `export` of the corresponding translation file.

```js
const localeImport = (src, locale) => {
    // update html lang attribute (optionnal)
    document.documentElement.setAttribute("lang", locale);
    return import(src);
};

// translations can be considered as a global signal
const translations = useI18n({
    fr: {
        FR: () => localeImport("./fr.js"),
        default: "FR",
    },
    en: {
        EN: () => localeImport("./en.js"),
        default: "EN",
    },
    default: "fr",
});
```

The object argument (called `definition`) must have two levels and the **default property** is **mandatory**, for example this is not allowed :

```js
useI18n({
    fr: () => import("./fr.js"),
    default: "fr",
});
```

## Hydration with locales

There are two ways to hydrate a component with translations:

-   Define the component once the queries to the translations are completed.
-   Immediately define component but add `&&` clause in translated directives.

If you immediately define a component and use translations in your directives you may get errors in your javascript expressions, for example this will throw an error :

```js
const myTranslationsSignal = useI18n(/* your definition here */);

// App render function
function App({ props }) {
    props.translations = myTranslationsSignal;
    return this;
}

// Component definition
useDefine("app", App);
```

```html
<x-app>
    <p x-text="translations().app.mycustomtext">...</p>
</x-app>
```

At this point, javascript execution will throw an error because `translations()` returns `undefined` and the `.app` property does not exist on type `undefined`. This error occurs because your `App` component is defined before translations are loaded.

We will see below how to solve this problem.

### Wait before hydration

The first solution is to use the native `onload` method of each translation signal. This will wait for your translations to be loaded before defining your component.

```js
const myTranslationsSignal = useI18n(/* your definition here */);

// App render function
function App({ props }) {
    props.translations = myTranslationsSignal;
    return this;
}

// Component definition using `onload`
myTranslationsSignal.onload(() => useDefine("app", App));
```

Pros :

-   Easy to setup, maintain and debug.
-   Apply translated directives just one time.

Cons :

-   Interactivity of the component is only available once the translations are loaded

## Use translations in components

The second solution applies directly to directives and simply consists of performing a `&&` type check on the translation signal.

```html
<x-app>
    <p x-text="translations() && translations().app.mycustomtext">...</p>
</x-app>
```

Pros :

-   Immediate interactivity of the component.

Cons :

-   Apply translated directives two times instead on one.
    -   One time with `undefined` as value.
    -   One time with the translation as value.
-   More verbose than `onload`.
-   Harder to setup, maintain and debug.

## Change the locale manually

Vif set the locale by default from `localStorage.getItem("locale")` or `navigator.language`. After that you can redefine the locale with the `locale` method of `useI18n`.

```js
function LanguageSwitcher({ props, html }) {
    props.toEnglish = () => useI18n.locale("en-US");
    return html`<button x-on:click="toEnglish">Switch to english</button>`;
}

useDefine("language-switcher", LanguageSwitcher);
```

If you want to store the new locale by default for the user, you can simply use `localStorage.setItem("locale", "en-US")`.

---

# Next

[Make your app ready for production !](../concepts/production.md)
